In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
Now the earth was formless and empty.
Darkness was over the surface of the deep.
and the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters.
And God said, “Let there be light,” and there was light.
God saw that the light was good.
he separated the light from the darkness.
God called the light day and the darkness he called night.
And there was evening, and there was morning the first day.
And God said,
“Let there be a vault between the waters to separate water from water.”
So God made the vault and separated the water under the vault from the water above it.
And it was so.
God called the vault sky.
And there was evening, and there was morning the second day.
And God said,
“Let the water under the sky be gathered to one place, and let dry ground appear.”
And it was so.
God called the dry ground land and the gathered waters he called seas.
And God saw that it was good.
Then God said,
“Let the land produce vegetation: seed-bearing plants and trees on the land that bear fruit with seed in it, according to their various kinds.” 
And it was so.
The land produced vegetation,
plants bearing seed according to their kinds and trees bearing fruit with seed in it according to their kinds.
And God saw that it was good.
And there was evening, and there was morning the third day.
And God said,
“Let there be lights in the vault of the sky,
so as to separate the day from the night,
and let them serve as signs to mark sacred times,
days and years,
let them be lights in the vault of the sky to give light on the earth.”
And it was so.
God made two great lights
the greater light to govern the day,
and the lesser light to govern the night.
He also made the stars.
God set them in the vault of the sky to give light on the earth,
to govern the day and the night, and to separate light from darkness.
And God saw that it was good.
And there was evening, and there was morning the fourth day.
And God said,
“Let the water teem with living creatures,
and let birds fly above the earth across the vault of the sky.”
So God created the great creatures of the sea,
and every living thing with which the water teems and that moves about in it,
according to their kinds,
and every winged bird according to its kind.
And God saw that it was good.
God blessed them and said,
“Be fruitful and increase in number and fill the water in the seas,
and let the birds increase on the earth.” 
And there was evening, and there was morning the fifth day.
And God said,
“Let the land produce living creatures according to their kinds:
the livestock,
the creatures that move along the ground,
and the wild animals,
each according to its kind.”
And it was so.
God made the wild animals according to their kinds,
the livestock according to their kinds,
and all the creatures that move along the ground according to their kinds.
And God saw that it was good.
Then God said,
“Let us make mankind in our image,
in our likeness.
So that they may rule over the fish in the sea,
and the birds in the sky,
livestock,
and all the creatures that move along the ground.”
So God created mankind in his own image,
in the image of God he created them;
male and female he created them.
God blessed them and said to them,
“Be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it.
Rule over the fish in the sea,
and the birds in the sky and over every living creature that moves on the ground.”
Then God said,
“See,
I give you every seed bearing plant on the face of the whole earth and every tree that has fruit with seed in it.
They will be yours for food.
And all the beasts of the earth,
and all the birds in the sky,
and all the creatures that move along the ground,
that has the breath of life in it,
I give every green plant for food.” 
And it was so.
God saw all that he had made, and it was very good.
And there was evening, and there was morning the sixth day.
Thus the heavens and the earth were completed in all their vast array.
By the seventh day God had finished the work he had been doing.
So on the seventh day he rested from all his work.
Then God blessed the seventh day and made it holy,
because on it he rested from all the work of creating that he had done.
This is the account of the heavens and the earth when they were created,
when the Lord God made the earth and the heavens.
Now no shrub had yet appeared on the earth and no plant had yet sprung up,
for the Lord God had not sent rain on the earth,
and there was no one to work the ground,
but streams came up from the earth and watered the whole surface of the ground.
Then the Lord God formed a man from the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,
and the man became a living being.
The Lord God had planted a garden in the east,
in Eden; and there he put the man he had formed.
The Lord God made all kinds of trees grow out of the ground trees that were pleasing to the eye and good for food.
In the middle of the garden were the tree of life,
and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
A river watering the garden flowed from Eden;
from there it was separated into four headwaters.
The name of the first is the Pishon.
this river winds through the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold.
The gold of that land is good.
aromatic resin and onyx are also there.
The name of the second river is the Gihon;
it winds through the entire land of Cush.
The name of the third river is the Tigris.
it runs along the east side of Ashur.
And the fourth river is the Euphrates.
The Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take care of it.
And the Lord God commanded the man,
“You are free to eat from any tree in the garden;
but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
For when you eat from it you will certainly die.”
The Lord God said,
“It is not good for the man to be alone.
I will make a helper suitable for him.”
Now the Lord God had formed out of the ground all the wild animals,
and all the birds in the sky.
He brought them to the man to see what he would name them.
And whatever the man called each living creature, that was its name.
So the man gave names to all the livestock,
the birds in the sky and all the wild animals.
But for Adam no suitable helper was found.
So the Lord God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep;
and while he was sleeping,
he took one of the man’s ribs,
and then closed up the place with flesh.
Then the Lord God made a woman from the rib he had taken out of the man,
and he brought her to the man.
The man said,
“This is now bone of my bones,
and flesh of my flesh;
she shall be called woman, for she was taken out of man.”
That is why a man leaves his father and mother and is united to his wife,
and they become one flesh.
Adam and his wife were both naked,
and they felt no shame.
Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the Lord God had made.
He said to the woman,
“Did God really say,
‘You must not eat from any tree in the garden’?”
The woman said to the serpent,
“We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden,
but God did say,
‘You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden,
and you must not touch it, or you will die.’”
the serpent said to the woman.
“You will not certainly die,”
“For God knows that when you eat from it,
your eyes will be opened,
and you will be like God,
knowing good and evil.”
When the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food,
and pleasing to the eye,
and also desirable for gaining wisdom,
she took some and ate it.
She also gave some to her husband,
who was with her,
and he ate it.
Then the eyes of both of them were opened,
and they realized they were naked;
so they sewed fig leaves together,
and made coverings for themselves.
Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord God as he was walking in the garden in the cool of the day,
and they hid from the Lord God among the trees of the garden.
But the Lord God called to the man,
“Where are you?”
and the man answered,
“I heard you in the garden, and I was afraid because I was naked so I hid.”
And God said,
“Who told you that you were naked?
Have you eaten fruits from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?”
The man said,
“The woman you put here with me,
she gave me some fruit from the tree, and I ate it.”
Then the Lord God said to the woman,
“What is this you have done?”
The woman said,
“The serpent deceived me,
and I ate.”
So the Lord God said to the serpent,
“Because you have done this,
Cursed are you above all livestock and all wild animals.
You will crawl on your belly and you will eat dust all the days of your life.
And I will put enmity between you and the woman,
and between your offspring and her offspring,
he will crush your head,
and you will strike his heel.”
And God said to the woman,
“I will make your pains in childbearing very severe,
you will give birth to children with painful labor.
Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you.”
Then he said to Adam,
“Because you listened to your wife,
and ate fruit from the tree about which I commanded you, not eat from it,
Cursed is the ground because of you;
you will eat food through painful toil from it all the days of your life.
It will produce thorns and thistles for you,
and you will eat the plants of the field.
By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground,
since from it you were taken;
for dust you are and to dust you will return.”
Adam named his wife Eve,
because she would become the mother of all the living.
The Lord God made garments of skin for Adam and his wife and clothed them.
And the Lord God said,
“See!, 
The man has now become like one of us,
knowing good and evil.
He must not be allowed to reach out his hand and take also from the tree of life and eat, and live forever.” 
So the Lord God banished him from the Garden of Eden,
to work the ground from which he had been taken.
he drove the man out,
and he placed cherubim on the east side of the Garden of Eden.
Then he placed a flaming sword flashing back and forth to guard the way to the tree of life.
Adam made love to his wife Eve.
and she became pregnant and gave birth to Cain.
She said,
“With the help of the Lord I have brought forth a man.”
Later she gave birth to his brother Abel.
Now Abel kept flocks,
Cain worked the soil.
In the course of time Cain brought some of the fruits of the soil as an offering to the Lord.
And Abel also brought an offering fat portions from some of the firstborn of his flock.
The Lord looked with favor on Abel and his offering, but on Cain and his offering he did not look with favor.
So Cain was very angry, and his face was downcast.
Then the Lord said to Cain,
“Why are you angry?
Why is your face downcast?
If you do what is right, will you not be accepted?
But if you do not do what is right,
sin is crouching at your door,
it desires to have you,
but you must rule over it.”
Now Cain said to his brother Abel.
While they were in the field,
Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him.
Then the Lord said to Cain,
“Where is your brother Abel?”
Cain replied.
“I don’t know,
“Am I my brother’s keeper?”
The Lord said,
“What have you done?
Your brother’s blood cries out to me from the ground.
Now you are under a curse and driven from the ground,
which opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from your hand.
When you work the ground,
it will no longer yield its crops for you.
You will be a restless wanderer on the earth.”
Cain said to the Lord,
“My punishment is more than I can bear.
Today you are driving me from the land,
and I will be hidden from your presence;
I will be a restless wanderer on the earth,
and whoever finds me will kill me.”
But the Lord said to him,
“anyone who kills Cain will suffer vengeance seven times over.” 
Then the Lord put a mark on Cain so that no one who found him would kill him.
So Cain went out from the Lord’s presence and lived in the land of Nod, east of Eden.
Cain made love to his wife,
she gave birth to Enoch.
Cain was then building a city,
and he named it after his son Enoch.
To Enoch was born Irad;
and Irad was the father of Mehujael;
and Mehujael was the father of Methushael;
and Methushael was the father of Lamech.
Lamech married two women, one named Adah and the other Zillah.
Adah gave birth to Jabal;
he was the father of those who live in tents and raise livestock.
His brother’s name was Jubal;
he was the father of all who play stringed instruments and pipes.
Zillah also had a son, Tubal-Cain, who forged all kinds of tools out of bronze and iron. 
Tubal Cain’s sister was Naamah.
Lamech said to his wives,
“Adah and Zillah, listen to me; wives of Lamech, hear my words.
I have killed a man for wounding me, a young man for injuring me.
If Cain is avenged seven times,
then Lamech seventy-seven times.”
Adam made love to his wife again,
and she gave birth to a son and named him Seth, saying,
“God has granted me another child in place of Abel, since Cain killed him.”
Seth also had a son, and he named him Enosh.
At that time people began to call on the name of the Lord.
This is the written account of Adam’s family line.
When God created mankind,
he made them in his likeness.
He created them male and female and blessed them.
And he named them Adam.
Adam had lived one hundre and thirty years,
he had a son in his own likeness,
in his own image;
and he named him Seth.
After Seth was born,
Adam lived 800 years and had other sons and daughters.
Adam died when he had 930 years.
When Seth had lived 105 years,
he became the father of Enosh.
After he became the father of Enosh,
Seth lived 807 years,
and had other sons and daughters.
Altogether, Seth lived a total of 912 years,
and then he died.
When Enosh had lived 90 years,
he became the father of Kenan.
Enosh lived 815 years after he became the father of Kenan,
and had other sons and daughters.
Enosh died at the age of 905.
When Kenan had lived 70 years,
he became the father of Mahalalel.
After he became the father of Mahalalel,
Kenan lived 840 years,
and had other sons and daughters.
Kenan died at the age of 910.
Mahalalel became the father of Jared at the age of 65 years.
After he became the father of Jared, Mahalalel lived 830 years.
and had other sons and daughters.
Mahalalel had a total of 895 years when he died.
When Jared had lived 162 years,
he became the father of Enoch.
After he became the father of Enoch,
and had other sons and daughters.
Jared died at the age of 962 years.
When Enoch had lived 65 years,
he became the father of Methuselah.
Enoch walked faithfully with God 300 years,
After he became the father of Methuselah,
and had other sons and daughters.
Enoch lived a total of 365 years.
Enoch walked faithfully with God;
then he was no more, because God took him away.
When Methuselah had lived 187 years,
he became the father of Lamech.
After he became the father of Lamech,
Methuselah lived 782 years,
and had other sons and daughters.
Methuselah died at the age of 969 years.
When Lamech had lived 182 years,
he had a son.
He named him Noah and said,
“He will comfort us in the labor and painful toil of our hands caused by the ground the Lord has cursed.”
After Noah was born,
Lamech  was 777 years when he died.
an when Noah was 500 years old,
he became the father of Shem, Ham and Japheth.
When human beings began to increase in number on the earth,
and daughters were born to them,
the sons of God saw that the daughters of humans were beautiful,
and they married any of them they chose.
Then the Lord said,
“My Spirit will not contend with humans forever,
for they are mortal,
their days will be a hundred and twenty years.”
The Nephilim were on the earth in those days,
when the sons of God went to the daughters of humans and had children by them.
They were the heroes of old,
men of renown.
The Lord saw how great the wickedness of the human race,
on the earth,
and that every inclination of the thoughts of the human heart was only evil all the time.
The Lord regretted that he had made human beings on the earth,
and his heart was deeply troubled.
So the Lord said,
“I will wipe from the face of the earth the human race I have created and with them the animals,
birds,
and the creatures that move along the ground,
for I regret that I have made them.”
But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord.
This is the account of Noah and his family.
Noah was a righteous man,
blameless among the people of his time,
and he walked faithfully with God.
Noah had three sons:
Shem,
Ham
and
Japheth.
Now the earth was corrupt in God’s sight and was full of violence.
God saw how corrupt the earth had become,
for all the people on earth had corrupted their ways.
So God said to Noah,
“I am going to put an end to all people,
for the earth is filled with violence because of them.
I am surely going to destroy both them and the earth. 
So make yourself an ark of cypress wood,
make rooms in it
and coat it with pitch inside and out.
This is how you are to build it,
The ark is to be three hundred cubits long,
fifty cubits wide
and thirty cubits high.
leaving below the roof an opening one cubit high all around,
Put a door in the side of the ark,
make lower,
middle
and upper decks.
I am going to bring floodwaters on the earth to destroy all life,
every creature that has the breath of life in it.
Everything on earth will perish.
But I will establish my covenant with you,
and you will enter the ark you and your sons
and your wife
and your sons’ wives.
You are to bring into the ark two of all living creatures,
male and female,
to keep them alive with you.
Two of every kind of bird,
of every kind of animal
and of every kind of creature that moves along the ground will come to you to be kept alive.
You are to take every kind of food that is to be eaten
and store it away as food for you and for them.”
Noah did everything just as God commanded him.
The Lord then said to Noah,
“Go into the ark, you and your whole family,
because I have found you righteous in this generation.
Take with you seven pairs of every kind of clean animal,
a male and its mate,
and one pair of every kind of unclean animal,
a male and its mate;
and also of every kind of bird,
seven pairs,
male and female,
to keep their various kinds alive throughout the earth. 
Seven days from now I will send rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights,
and I will wipe from the face of the earth every living creature I have made.”
And Noah did all that the Lord commanded him.
Noah was six hundred years old when the floodwaters came on the earth.
And Noah and his sons and his wife and his sons’ wives entered the ark,
to escape the waters of the flood.
Pairs of clean and unclean animals,
of birds
and of all creatures that move along the ground,
male and female,
came to Noah and entered the ark,
as God had commanded Noah.
And after the seven days the floodwaters came on the earth.
In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life,
on the second month,
on the seventeenth day,
on that day all the springs of the great deep burst forth,
and the floodgates of the heavens were opened.
And rain fell on the earth forty days and forty nights.
On that day,
Noah and his sons,
Shem,
Ham
and
Japheth,
together with his wife,
and the wives of his three sons,
entered the ark.
They had with them every wild animal according to its kind,
all livestock according to their kinds,
every creature that moves along the ground according to its kind
and every bird according to its kind
and everything with wings.
Pairs of all creatures that have the breath of life in them came to Noah and entered the ark.
on them who entered,
were male and female
of every living thing,
as God had commanded Noah.
Then the Lord shut him in.
For forty days the flood kept coming on the earth,
and as the waters increased they lifted the ark high above the earth.
The waters rose and increased greatly on the earth,
and the ark floated on the surface of the water.
They rose greatly on the earth,
and all the high mountains under the entire heavens were covered.
The waters rose and covered the mountains to a depth of more than fifteen cubits.
Every living thing that moved on land perished;
birds,
livestock,
wild animals,
all the creatures that swarm over the earth
and all mankind.
Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died.
Every living thing on the face of the earth was wiped out;
people,
animals,
the creatures that move along the ground
and birds.
were wiped from the earth.
Only Noah and those with him in the ark.
The waters flooded the earth for a hundred and fifty days.
But God remembered Noah,
the wild animals
and the livestock that were with him in the ark.
And he sent a wind over the earth,
and the waters receded.
Now the springs of the deep and the floodgates of the heavens had been closed,
and the rain had stopped falling from the sky.
The water receded steadily from the earth.
At the end of the hundred and fifty days the water had gone down,
and on the seventeenth day,
seventh month,
the ark came to rest,
on the mountains of Ararat.
The waters continued to recede,
until the tenth month,
and on the first day,
the mountains became visible.
After forty days,
Noah opened a window of the ark,
and sent out a raven,
it kept flying back and forth until the water had dried up from the earth.
he sent out a dove,
to see if the water had receded from the surface of the ground.
But the dove could find nowhere to perch,
because there was water over all the surface of the earth,
so it returned to Noah in the ark.
He reached out his hand and took the dove and brought it back to himself in the ark.
He waited seven more days,
and again sent out the dove from the ark.
When the dove returned to him in the evening,
there in its beak was a freshly plucked olive leaf,
then Noah knew that the water had receded from the earth.
He waited seven more days,
and sent the dove out again;
but this time it did not return to him.
By the first day,
on the first month,
the water had dried up from the earth.
Noah then removed the covering from the ark,
and saw that the surface of the ground was dry.
The earth was dry,
on the second month
on the twenty-seventh day.
Then God said to Noah,
“Come out of the ark,
you and your wife,
and your sons
and their wives.
Bring out every kind of living creature that is with you;
birds,
animals,
and all the creatures that move along the ground,
so they can be fruitful,
to multiply and increase in number on the earth.”
So Noah came out,
and his sons,
and his wife,
and his sons’ wives.
All the animals,
all the creatures that move along the ground,
all the birds,
all that moves on land,
came out of the ark,
one kind after another.
Then Noah built an altar to the Lord,
and taking some of all the clean animals,
and clean birds,
he sacrificed burnt offerings. 
The Lord smelled the pleasing aroma,
and said in his heart:
“Never again will I curse the ground because of humans,
even though every inclination of the human heart is evil from childhood.
And never again will I destroy all living creatures,
as I have done.
“As long as the earth endures,
seedtime and harvest will never cease,
cold and heat,
summer and winter,
day and night.”
Then God blessed Noah,
and his sons,
and sayid to them,
“Be fruitful and increase in number and fill the earth.
The fear and dread of you will fall on all the beasts of the earth;
and on all the birds in the sky,
every creature that moves along the ground,
and all the fish in the sea,
they are given into your hands.
Everything that lives and moves about will be food for you.
Just as I gave you the green plants,
I now give you everything.
“But you must not eat meat that has its life blood still in it.
And for your life blood I will surely demand an accounting.
I will demand an accounting from every animal.
And from each human being,
“Whoever sheds human blood,
by humans shall their blood be shed;
for in the image of God has God made mankind.
be fruitful and increase in number;
multiply on the earth and increase upon it.”
Then God said to Noah and to his sons:
“I now establish my covenant with you,
and with your descendants after you,
and with every living creature that was with you;
birds,
livestock,
and all the wild animals,
like how they came out of the ark.
I establish my covenant with you:
Never again will all life be destroyed by the waters of a flood;
never again will there be a flood to destroy the earth.”
And God said,
“This is the sign of the covenant
I am making between
me and you
and every living creature with you,
a covenant for all generations to come:
I have set my rainbow in the clouds,
and it will be the sign of the covenant between me and the earth. 
Whenever I bring clouds over the earth,
and the rainbow appears in the clouds,
I will remember my covenant between,
me and you,
and all living creatures of every kind.
Never again will the waters become a flood to destroy all life.
Whenever the rainbow appears in the clouds,
I will see it and remember the everlasting covenant,
between God and all living creatures of every kind on the earth.”
So God said to Noah,
“This is the sign of the covenant I have established between me and all life on the earth.”
The sons of Noah who came out of the ark were
Shem,
Ham
and
Japheth.
Ham was the father of Canaan.
These were the three sons of Noah,
and from them came the people who were scattered over the whole earth.
Noah became a man of the soil,
and he planted a vineyard.
When he drank some of its wine,
he became drunk and lay uncovered inside his tent.
Ham, the father of Canaan,
saw his father naked
and told his two brothers outside.
But Shem and Japheth took a garment,
and laid it across their shoulders;
then they walked in backward
and covered their father’s naked body.
Their faces were turned the other way so that they would not see their father naked.
When Noah awoke from his wine,
and found out what his youngest son had done to him,
and he said,
“Cursed be Canaan!
The lowest of slaves will he be to his brothers.”
He also said,
“Praise be Shem to the Lord,
and May Canaan be his slave.
May God extend Japheth’s territory;
may Japheth live in the tents of Shem;
and may Canaan be his slave.”
After the flood Noah lived 350 years.
Noah lived a total of 950 years;
and then he died.
This is the account of Noah’s sons:
Shem,
Ham
and
Japheth,
who themselves had sons after the flood.
The sons of Japheth:
Gomer,
Magog,
Madai,
Javan,
Tubal,
Meshek
and
Tiras.
The sons of Gomer:
Ashkenaz,
Riphath
and
Togarmah.
The sons of Javan:
Elishah,
Tarshish,
the Kittites
and
the Rodanites.
each with its own language,
for their clans,
within their nations;
The sons of Ham:
Cush,
Egypt,
Put
and
Canaan.
The sons of Cush:
Seba,
Havilah,
Sabtah,
Raamah
and
Sabteka.
The sons of Raamah:
Sheba
and
Dedan.
Cush was the father of Nimrod,
who became a mighty warrior on the earth.
He was a mighty hunter before the Lord;
that is why it is said,
“Like Nimrod,
a mighty hunter before the Lord.”
The first centers of his kingdom were
Babylon,
Uruk,
Akkad
and
Kalneh,
in Shinar.
From that land he went to Assyria,
where he built Nineveh,
Rehoboth Ir,
Calah
and
Resen,
which is between Nineveh and Calah,
which is the great city.
Egypt was the father of
the Ludites,
Anamites,
Lehabites,
Naphtuhites,
Pathrusites,
Kasluhites
from whom the Philistines came
and
Caphtorites.
Canaan was the father of
Sidon
his firstborn,
and
Hittites,
Jebusites,
Amorites,
Girgashites,
Hivites,
Arkites,
Sinites,
Arvadites,
Zemarites
and
Hamathites.
Later the Canaanite clans scattered.
and the borders of Canaan reached from Sidon,
toward Gerar as far as Gaza,
and then toward Sodom,
Gomorrah,
Admah
and
Zeboyim,
upto
Lasha.
These are the sons of Ham,
by their clans
and
languages,
in their territories
and nations.
Sons were also born to Shem,
whose older brother was Japheth;
Shem was the ancestor of all the sons of Eber.
The sons of Shem:
Elam,
Ashur,
Arphaxad,
Lud
and
Aram.
The sons of Aram:
Uz,
Hul,
Gether
and
Meshek.
Arphaxad was the father of Shelah,
and Shelah the father of Eber.
Two sons were born to Eber:
One was named Peleg,
because in his time the earth was divided;
and his brother was named Joktan.
Joktan was the father of
Almodad,
Sheleph,
Hazarmaveth,
Jerah,
Hadoram,
Uzal,
Diklah,
Obal,
Abimael,
Sheba,
Ophir,
Havilah
and
Jobab. 
All these were sons of Joktan.
The region where they lived stretched from Mesha,
toward Sephar,
the eastern hill.
These are the sons of Shem,
by their clans
and languages,
in their territories and nations.
These are the clans of Noah’s sons,
according to their lines of descent,
within their nations. 
And from these,
the nations spread out over the earth,
after the flood.
Now the whole world had one language and a common speech.
As people moved eastward,
they found a plain in Shinar and settled there.
They said to each other,
“Come, let’s make bricks and bake them thoroughly.”
They used brick instead of stone,
and tar for mortar.
Then they said,
“Come,
let us build ourselves a city,
and build a tower that reaches to the heavens,
so that we may make a name for ourselves;
otherwise we will be scattered over the face of the whole earth.”
But the Lord came down to see the city,
and the tower the people were building.
The Lord said,
“See,
one people,
and all are speaking the same language,
they have begun to do something like this.
Nothing they plan to do will be impossible for them.
Let us go,
we go down,
and confuse their language so they will not understand each other.”
the Lord scattered them from there over all the earth;
and they stopped building the city.
That tower was called Babel,
because there the Lord confused the language of the whole world.
the Lord scattered them over the face of the whole earth.
This is the account of Shem’s family line.
when Shem was hundred years old,
he became the father of Arphaxad,
in the second year after the flood.
Shem lived 500 years after he became the father of Arphaxad,
and had other sons and daughters.
Arphaxad had lived 35 years,
then he became the father of Shelah.
Arphaxad lived 403 years after he became the father of Shelah,
and had other sons and daughters.
Shelah had lived 30 years,
when he became the father of Eber.
Shelah lived 403 years after he became the father of Eber,
and had other sons and daughters.
Eber had lived 34 years,
when he became the father of Peleg.
Eber lived 430 years after he became the father of Peleg,
and had other sons and daughters.
Peleg had lived 30 years,
he became the father of Reu.
Peleg lived 209 years after he became the father of Reu,
and had other sons and daughters.
Reu had lived 32 years,
he became the father of Serug.
Reu lived 207 years after he became the father of Serug,
and had other sons and daughters.
Serug had lived 30 years,
he became the father of Nahor.
Serug lived 200 years after he became the father of Nahor,
and had other sons and daughters.
Nahor had lived 29 years,
he became the father of Terah.
Nahor lived 119 years after he became the father of Terah,
and had other sons and daughters.
Terah had lived 70 years,
he became the father of
Abram,
Nahor
and
Haran.
This is the account of Terah’s family line.
Terah became the father of
Abram,
Nahor,
and
Haran.
Haran became the father of
Lot.
in the land of his birth,
in Ur of the Chaldeans,
Haran died.
Abram and Nahor both married.
The name of Abram’s wife was Sarai,
and the name of Nahor’s wife was Milkah,
daughter of Haran,
the father of Milkah and Iskah.
she was childless.
Sarai was not able to conceive.
Terah took his son Abram,
and his grandson Lot son of Haran,
and Sarai the wife of his son Abram.
they set out from Ur of the Chaldeans,
to go to Canaan.
and when they came to Harran,
they settled there.
Terah lived 205 years,
and he died in Harran.
The Lord had said to Abram,
“Go from your country,
from your people
and from your father’s household,
to the land I will show you.
“I will make you,
into a great nation,
and I will bless you;
I will make your name great,
and you will be a blessing.
I will bless those who bless you,
and curse those who curse you;
and all peoples on earth will be blessed through you.”
Abram went,
as the Lord had told him;
and Lot went with him.
Abram was seventy-five years old,
when he set out from Harran.
He took his wife Sarai,
his Lot nephew,
all the possessions they had accumulated,
and the people they had acquired in Harran.
and they set out for the land of Canaan,
and they arrived there.
Abram traveled through the land as far as the site of the great tree of Moreh at Shechem.
At that time the Canaanites were in the land.
The Lord appeared to Abram and said,
“To your offspring I will give this land.”
So Abraham built an altar there to the Lord,
who had appeared to him.
From there he went on toward the hills east of Bethel,
and pitched his tent,
so on the west,
there was Bethel
and Ai on the east.
There he built an altar to the Lord,
and called on the name of the Lord.
Then Abram set out and continued toward the Negev.
Now there was a famine in the land,
and Abram went down to Egypt,
to live there for a while because the famine was severe.
As he was about to enter Egypt,
he said to his wife Sarai,
“Atleast,
I know that you are a beautiful woman.
When the Egyptians see you,
they will say,
‘This is his wife.’
and they will kill me
and let you live.
Say you are my sister,
so that I will be treated well for your sake,
and my life will be spared because of you.”
When Abram came to Egypt,
the Egyptians saw that Sarai was a very beautiful woman.
And when Pharaoh’s officials saw her,
they praised her to Pharaoh,
and she was taken into his palace.
He treated Abram well for her sake,
and Abram acquired sheep and cattle,
male and female donkeys,
male and female servants,
and camels.
But the Lord inflicted serious diseases on Pharaoh,
and his household,
because of Abram’s wife Sarai.
So Pharaoh summoned Abram.
and he said.
“What have you done to me?
“Why didn’t you tell me Sarai is your wife?
Why did you say,
‘She is my sister,’
so that I took her to be my wife.
Here is your wife.
Take her and go!”
Then Pharaoh gave orders about Abram to his men,
and they sent him on his way,
with his wife and everything he had.
So Abram went up from Egypt to the Negev,
with his wife,
and everything he had,
with Lot.
Abram had become very wealthy;
he hade livestock,
silver,
and gold.
from the Negev,
he went from place to place,
until Bethel,
upto the place between Bethel and Ai,
where his tent had been earlier,
and where he had first built an altar.
There Abram called on the name of the Lord.
who was moving about with Abram,
Now Lot also had flocks, and, herds and tents.
the land could not support them while they stayed together,
for their possessions were so great.
And quarreling arose between Abram’s herders and Lot’s.
Canaanites and Perizzites,
were also living in the land at that time.
So Abram said to Lot,
“Let’s not have any quarreling between us,
you and me,
or between your herders and mine,
for we are close relatives.
Is not the whole land before you?
Let’s part company.
If you go to the left,
I’ll go to the right;
or if you go to the right,
I’ll go to the left.”
Lot looked around
and saw that the whole plain of the Jordan toward Zoar was well watered,
like the garden of the Lord,
like the land of Egypt. 
before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.
So Lot chose for himself the whole plain of the Jordan,
and set out toward the east.
Abram lived in the land of Canaan,
Lot lived among the cities of the plain,
and pitched his tents near Sodom.
Now the people of Sodom were wicked and were sinning greatly against the Lord.
after Lot and Abraham had parted,
the Lord said to Abram,
“Look around from where you are;
to the north and south,
to the east and west.
All the land that you see I will give to you and your offspring forever.
I will make your offspring like the dust of the earth,
so that if anyone could count the dust,
then your offspring could be counted.
Go,
walk through the length and breadth of the land,
for I am giving it to you.”
So Abram went to live near the great trees of,
Mamre at Hebron, where he pitched his tents.
and he built an altar to the Lord.
At the time Amraphel,
king of Shinar,
Arioch king of Ellasar,
Kedorlaomer king of Elam
and Tidal king of Goyim,
these kings went to war against Bera king of Sodom,
Birsha king of Gomorrah,
Shinab king of Admah,
Shemeber king of Zeboyim,
and the king of Bela
(that is Zoar).
All these latter kings joined forces in the Valley of Siddim,
(that is the Dead Sea Valley).
For twelve years they had been subject to Kedorlaomer,
and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
in the fourteenth year,
Kedorlaomer and the kings allied with him,
defeated the Rephaites in Ashteroth Karnaim,
Zuzites in Ham,
Emites in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
the Horites in the hill country Seir,
upto El Paran near the desert.
Then they turned back and went to En Mishpat,
that is, Kadesh,
and they conquered the whole territory of the Amalekites,
and Amorites who were living in Hazezon Tamar.
marched out,
king of Sodom,
king of Gomorrah,
king of Admah,
king of Zeboyim
and king of Bela
that is, Zoar
and drew up their battle lines in the Valley of Siddim,
and Kedorlaomer,
king of Elam,
Tidal king of Goyim,
Amraphel king of Shinar,
Arioch king of Ellasar,
four kings against five kings.
Now the Valley of Siddim was full of tar pits,
and when the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled,
some of the men fell into them,
and the rest fled to the hills.
The four kings seized all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their food;
then they went away.
They also carried off Abram’s nephew Lot,
and his possessions,
since he was living in Sodom.
A man who had escaped came and reported this to Abram the Hebrew.
Now Abram was living near the great trees of Mamre the Amorite,
a brother of Eshkol and Aner,
all of whom were allied with Abram.
When Abram heard that his relative had been taken captive,
he called out the trained men born in his household,
and went in pursuit as far as Dan.
During the night,
Abram divided his men to attack and defeate the enemies.
he followed them upto Hobah,
north of Damascus.
He recovered and brought back all the goods,
together with the women and the other people
he safed his relative Lot and his possessions.
After Abram returned from defeating Kedorlaomer and the kings allied with him,
the king of Sodom came out to meet him in the Valley of Shaveh,
that is the King’s Valley.
Then Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine.
He was priest of God Most High,
And he blessed Abram, saying,
“Blessed be Abram by God Most High,
Creator of heaven and earth.
And praise be to God Most High,
who delivered your enemies into your hand.”
Then Abram gave him a tenth of everything.
The king of Sodom said to Abram,
“Give me the people and keep the goods for yourself.”
But Abram said to the king of Sodom,
“With raised hand I have sworn an oath to the Lord,
God Most High,
Creator of heaven and earth,
that I will accept nothing belonging to you,
not even a thread or the strap of a sandal,
so that you will never be able to say,
‘I made Abram rich.’
I will accept nothing but what my men have eaten,
and the share that belongs to the men who went with me,
Aner,
Eshkol
and Mamre.
Let them have their share.”
After this,
the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision,
“Do not be afraid, Abram.
I am your shield,
your very great reward.”
But Abram said,
“Sovereign Lord,
what can you give,
me since I remain childless,
and the one who will inherit my estate is Eliezer of Damascus?”
And Abram said,
“You have given me no children;
so a servant in my household will be my heir.”
the word of the Lord came to him:
“This man will not be your heir,
but a son who is your own flesh and blood will be your heir.” 
He took him outside and said:
“Look up at the sky and count the stars if indeed you can count them.”
Then he said to him,
“So shall your offspring be.”
Abram believed the Lord,
and he credited it to him as righteousness.
He also said to him,
“I am the Lord,
who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to take possession of it.”
But Abram said,
“Sovereign Lord, how can I know that I will gain possession of it?”
So the Lord said to him,
“Bring me a heifer three years old,
a goat and three years old,
ram three years old,
dove and a young pigeon.”
Abram brought all these to him,
cut them in two and arranged the halves opposite each other;
the birds, however, he did not cut in half.
Then birds of prey came down on the carcasses,
but Abram drove them away.
As the sun was setting,
Abram fell into a deep sleep,
and a thick and dreadful darkness came over him.
Then the Lord said to him,
“for four hundred years your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own,
and that they will be enslaved,
and mistreated there.
But I will punish the nation they serve as slaves,
and afterward they will come out with great possessions.
You will go to your ancestors in peace and be buried at a good old age.
In the fourth generation your descendants will come back here,
for the sin of the Amorites has not yet reached its full measure.”
When the sun had set and darkness had fallen,
a smoking firepot with a blazing torch appeared and passed between the pieces.
On that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram and said,
“To your descendants I give this land,
from the Wadi of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates,
land of Kenites,
Kenizzites,
Kadmonites,
Hittites,
Perizzites,
Rephaites,
Amorites,
Canaanites,
Girgashites
and Jebusites.”
Now Sarai, Abram’s wife, had borne him no children.
But,
she had an Egyptian slave named Hagar;
so she said to Abram,
“The Lord has kept me from having children.
Go, sleep with my slave perhaps I can build a family through her.”
Abram agreed to what Sarai said.
After Abram had been living in Canaan ten years,
Sarai his wife took her Egyptian slave Hagar and gave her,
Abraham her husband to be his wife.
He slept with Hagar, and she conceived.
When she knew Hagar was pregnant,
Sarai began to despise her mistress.
Then Sarai said to Abram,
“You are responsible for the wrong I am suffering.
I put my slave in your arms,
and now that she knows she is pregnant,
she despises me.
May the Lord judge between you and me.”
Abram said.
“Your slave is in your hands,
Do with her whatever you think best.”
Then Sarai mistreated Hagar until she fled from her.
The angel of the Lord found Hagar near a spring in the desert;
it was the spring that is beside the road to Shur.
And he said,
“Hagar,
slave of Sarai,
where have you come from,
and where are you going?”
she answered,
“I’m running away from my mistress Sarai.”
Then the angel of the Lord told her,
“Go back to your mistress and submit to her.”
The angel added,
“I will increase your descendants so much that they will be too numerous to count.”
The angel of the Lord also said to her:
“You are now pregnant and you will give birth to a son.
and You shall name him Ishmael,
for the Lord has heard of your misery.
He will be a wild donkey of a man.
his hand will be against everyone,
and everyone’s hand against him.”
She gave this name to the Lord who spoke to her,
“You are the God who sees me,”
for she said,
“I have now seen the One who sees me.” 
That is why the well was called Beer Lahai Roi;
it is still there, between Kadesh and Bered.
So Hagar bore Abram a son,
and Abram gave the name Ishmael to the son she had borne.
Abram was eighty six years old,
when Hagar bore him Ishmael.
When Abram was ninety-nine years old,
the Lord appeared to him and said,
“I am God Almighty.
walk before me faithfully and be blameless.
Then I will make my covenant between us,
me and you,
and will greatly increase your numbers.”
Abram fell facedown, and God said to him,
“this is my covenant with you,
you will be the father of many nations.
No longer will you be called Abram,
your name will be Abraham,
for I have made you a father of many nations.
I will make you very fruitful,
I will make nations of you,
and kings will come from you.
I will establish my covenant between me and you,
and your descendants after you for the generations to come,
as an everlasting covenant,
and I be your God and the God of your descendants after you.
The whole land of Canaan,
where you now reside as a foreigner,
I will give as an everlasting possession to you and your descendants after you;
and I will be their God.”
Then God said to Abraham,
“You must keep my covenant,
you and your descendants after you for the generations to come.
This is my covenant between us,
you and me,
and your descendants after you,
Every male among you shall be circumcised.
You are to undergo circumcision,
and it will be the sign of the covenant between me and you.
every male among you who is eight days old must be circumcised,
any male in the generations to come
including those born in your household,
or bought with money from a foreigner those who are not your offspring.
Those born in your household must be circumcised
including who is bought with your money.
My covenant in your flesh is to be an everlasting covenant.
Any male who has not been circumcised in the flesh,
will be cut off from his people;
because he has broken my covenant.”
God also said to Abraham,
“Do not call your wife Sarai;
her name will be Sarah.
I will bless her
and will surely give you a son by her.
I will bless her so that she will be the mother of nations;
kings of peoples will come from her.”
Abraham fell facedown;
and he laughed and said to himself,
“Will a son be born to a man a hundred years old?
Will Sarah bear a child at the age of ninety?”
And Abraham said to God,
“If only Ishmael might live under your blessing!”
Then God said,
“your wife Sarah will bear you a son,
and you will call him Isaac.
I will establish my covenant with him and his descendants,
so as to be an everlasting covenant.
And as for Ishmael,
I have heard you:
I will bless him;
I will make him fruitful.
I will greatly increase his numbers.
He will be the father of twelve rulers,
and I will make him into a great nation.
My covenant I will establish with Isaac,
whom Sarah will bear to you by this time next year.”
When he had finished speaking with Abraham,
God went up.
On that very day Abraham took his son Ishmael,
and all those born in his household
with those who were bought with his money,
every male in his household,
and circumcised them on that day,
as God told him.
Abraham was ninety nine years old when he was circumcised.
And his son Ishmael was thirteen when he was circumcised.
Abraham and his son Ishmael were both circumcised on that very day. 
including every male in Abraham’s household,
those born in his household
and visitors who were bought from a foreigner.
The Lord appeared to Abraham near the great trees of Mamre
while he was sitting at the entrance to his tent in the heat of the day.
Abraham looked up and saw three men standing nearby.
When he saw them,
he hurried from the entrance of his tent to meet them and bowed low to the ground.
He said,
“If I have found favor in your eyes, my lord, do not pass your servant by.
Let a little water be brought,
and then you may all wash your feet and rest under this tree.
Let me get you something to eat,
so you can be refreshed,
and then go on your way,
bacause you have come to your servant.”
they answered,
“Do as you say.”
So Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah.
“Quick,”
he said,
“get three seahs of the finest flour and knead it and bake some bread.”
Then he ran to the herd and selected a choice, tender calf,
and gave it to a servant, who hurried to prepare it.
He then brought some curds, milk and the calf that had been prepared,
and set these before them.
While they ate,
he stood near them under a tree.
they asked him,
“Where is your wife Sarah?”
he said,
“There, in the tent.” 
Then one of them said,
“I will surely return to you about this time next year,
and Sarah your wife will have a son.”
Now Sarah was listening at the entrance to the tent, which was behind him.
Abraham and Sarah were already very old;
and Sarah was past the age of childbearing.
So Sarah laughed to herself as she thought,
“After I am worn out and my lord is old, will I now have this pleasure?”
Then the Lord said to Abraham,
“Why did Sarah laugh and say,
‘Will I really have a child, now that I am old?’
Is anything too hard for the Lord?
I will return to you at the appointed time next year,
and Sarah will have a son.”
because Sarah was afraid,
she lied and said,
“I did not laugh.”
But he said,
“you did laugh.”
When the men got up to leave,
they looked down toward Sodom.
Then the Lord said,
“Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do?
Abraham will surely become a great and powerful nation,
and all nations on earth will be blessed through him.
For I have chosen him, so that he will direct his children and his household after him,
to keep the way of the Lord by doing what is right and just,
so that the Lord will bring about for Abraham what he has promised him.”
Then the Lord said,
“The outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is so great,
and their sin so grievous,
I will go down and see if what they have done is as bad as the outcry that has reached me.
If not, I will know.”
The men turned away and went toward Sodom,
but Abraham remained standing before the Lord.
Then Abraham approached him and said:
“Will you sweep away the righteous with the wicked?
What if there are fifty righteous people in the city?
Will you really sweep it away and not spare the place for the sake of the fifty righteous people in it?
Far be it from you to do such a thing to kill the righteous with the wicked,
treating the righteous and the wicked alike.
Far be it from you.
Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?”
The Lord said,
“If I find fifty righteous people in the city of Sodom,
I will spare the whole place for their sake.”
Then Abraham spoke up again:
“Now that I have been so bold as to speak to the Lord,
though I am nothing but dust and ashes,
what if the number of the righteous is five less than fifty?
Will you destroy the whole city for lack of five people?”
“If I find forty five there,”
he said,
“I will not destroy it.”
Once again he spoke to him,
“What if only forty are found there?”
He said,
“For the sake of forty, I will not do it.”
he said,
“May the Lord not be angry,
but let me speak.
What if only thirty can be found there?”
He answered,
“I will not do it if I find thirty there.”
kile said,
“Now that I have been so bold as to speak to the Lord,
what if only twenty can be found there?”
He said,
“For the sake of twenty, I will not destroy it.”
he said,
“May the Lord not be angry,
but let me speak just once more.
What if only ten can be found there?”
He answered,
“For the sake of ten, I will not destroy it.”
When the Lord had finished speaking with Abraham,
he left;
and Abraham returned home.
The two angels arrived at Sodom in the evening,
and Lot was sitting in the gateway of the city.
When he saw them,
he got up to meet them and bowed down with his face to the ground.
he said,
“My lords,
please turn aside to your servant’s house.
and spend the night,
You can wash your feet and then go on your way early.”
they answered,
“No,
we will spend the night in the square.”
But he insisted so strongly that they did go with him and entered his house.
He prepared a meal for them, baking bread without yeast,
and they ate.
Before they had gone to bed,
all the men from every part of the city of Sodom surrounded the house.
both young and old.
They called to Lot,
“Where are the men who came to you tonight?
Bring them out to us so that we can have sex with them.”
Lot went outside to meet them and shut the door behind him,
and said,
“No,
my friends.
don’t do this wicked thing.
Look,
I have two daughters who have never slept with a man.
Let me bring them out to you, and you can do what you like with them.
But don’t do anything to these men, for they have come under the protection of my roof.”
“Get out of our way,”
they replied.
“This fellow came here as a foreigner,
and now he wants to play the judge!
We’ll treat you worse than them.”
They kept bringing pressure on Lot and moved forward to break down the door.
But the men inside reached out and pulled Lot back into the house and shut the door.
Then they struck with blindness the men who were at the door of the house,
young and old,
so that they could not find the door.
The two men said to Lot,
“Do you have anyone else here?
sons-in-law,
your sons,
daughters,
or anyone else in the city who belongs to you?
Get them out of here,
because we are going to destroy this place.
The outcry to the Lord against its people is so great that he has sent us to destroy it.”
So Lot went out and spoke to his sons-in-law who were pledged to marry his daughters.
“Hurry and get out of this place,
because the Lord is about to destroy the city.”
But his sons-in-law thought he was joking.
With the coming of dawn, the angels urged Lot, saying,
“Hurry! Take your wife and your two daughters who are here, or you will be swept away when the city is punished.”
When he hesitated,
the men grasped his hand,
and the hands of his wife and of his two daughters
and led them safely out of the city,
for the Lord was merciful to them.
As soon as they had brought them out, one of them said,
“Flee for your lives,
Don’t look back,
and don’t stop anywhere in the plain!
Flee to the mountains or you will be swept away!”
Lot said to them,
“No,
my lords!
Your servant has found favor in your eyes,
and you have shown great kindness to me in sparing my life.
But I can’t flee to the mountains;
this disaster will overtake me, and I’ll die.
Look,
here is a town near enough to run to, and it is small,
Let me flee to it—it is very small, isn’t it? Then my life will be spared.”
He said to him,
“I will grant this request too;
I will not overthrow the town you speak of.
But flee there quickly,
because I cannot do anything until you reach it.”
That is why the town was called Zoar.
The sun had risen over the land,
by the time Lot reached Zoar.
Then the Lord rained down burning sulfur on Sodom and Gomorrah from the Lord out of the heavens.
Thus he overthrew those cities,
the entire plain,
all those living in the cities,
and also the vegetation in the land.
But Lot’s wife looked back,
and she became a pillar of salt.
Early the next morning Abraham got up and returned to the place where he had stood before the Lord.
He looked down toward Sodom and Gomorrah,
toward all the land of the plain,
and he saw dense smoke rising from the land,
like smoke from a furnace.
So when God destroyed the cities of the plain,
he remembered Abraham,
and he brought Lot,
out of the catastrophe that overthrew the cities where Lot had lived.
Lot left Zoar and settled in the mountains with his two daughters ,
for he was afraid to stay in Zoar.
He lived in a cave with his two daughters.
One day the older daughter said to the younger,
“Our father is old,
and there is no man around here to give us children
as is the custom all over the earth.
Let’s get our father to drink wine,
and then sleep with him
and preserve our family line through our father.”
That night they got their father to drink wine,
and the older daughter went in and slept with him.
He was not aware of it when she lay down,
or when she got up.
The next day the older daughter said to the younger,
“Last night I slept with my father.
Let’s get him to drink wine again tonight,
and you go in and sleep with him so we can preserve our family line through our father.” 
So they got their father to drink wine that night also,
and the younger daughter went in and slept with him.
Again he was not aware of it when she lay down,
or when she got up.
So both of Lot’s daughters became pregnant by their father.
The older daughter had a son,
and she named him Moab.
He is the father of the Moabites of today.
The younger daughter also had a son,
and she named him Ben-Ammi.
He is the father of the Ammonites of today.
Now Abraham moved on from there into the region of the Negev
and lived between Kadesh and Shur.
For a while he stayed in Gerar,
there Abraham said of his wife Sarah,
“She is my sister.”
Then Abimelek king of Gerar sent for Sarah and took her.
But God came to Abimelek in a dream one night and said to him,
“You are as good as dead,
the woman you have taken she is a married woman.”
Now Abimelek had not gone near her.
so he said,
“Lord, will you destroy an innocent nation?
Did he not say to me,
‘She is my sister,’
and didn’t she also say,
‘He is my brother’?
I have done this with a clear conscience and clean hands.”
Then God said to him in the dream,
“Yes,
I know you did this with a clear conscience.
And so I have kept you from sinning against me.
That is why I did not let you touch her.
Now return the man’s wife,
for he is a prophet,
and he will pray for you and you will live.
But if you do not return her,
you may be sure that you and all who belong to you will die.”
Early the next morning Abimelek summoned all his officials,
and when he told them all that had happened,
and they were very much afraid.
Then Abimelek called Abraham in and said,
“What have you done to us?
How have I wronged you,
that you have brought such great guilt upon me and my kingdom?
You have done things to me that should never be done.”
And Abimelek asked Abraham,
“What was your reason for doing this?”
Abraham replied,
“I said to myself,
There is surely no fear of God in this place,
and they will kill me because of my wife.
Besides, she really is my sister,
the daughter of my father though not of my mother and she became my wife.
And when God had me wander from my father’s household,
I said to her,
‘This is how you can show your love to me,
Everywhere we go, say of me,
“He is my brother.”’”
Then Abimelek brought sheep and cattle and male and female slaves and gave them to Abraham,
and he returned Sarah his wife to him.
And Abimelek said,
“My land is before you,
live wherever you like.”
To Sarah he said,
“I am giving your brother a thousand shekels of silver.
This is to cover the offense against you before all who are with you,
you are completely vindicated.”
Then Abraham prayed to God,
and God healed Abimelek,
his wife and his female slaves so they could have children again.
For the Lord had kept all the women in Abimelek’s household from conceiving,
because of Abraham’s wife Sarah.
Now the Lord was gracious to Sarah as he had said,
and the Lord did for Sarah what he had promised.
Sarah became pregnant and bore a son to Abraham in his old age,
at the very time God had promised him.
Abraham gave the name Isaac to the son Sarah bore him.
When his son Isaac was eight days old,
Abraham circumcised him,
as God commanded him.
Abraham was a hundred years old,
when his son Isaac was born to him.
Sarah said,
“God has brought me laughter,
and everyone who hears about this will laugh with me.”
And she added,
“Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children?
Yet I have borne him a son in his old age.”
The child grew and was weaned,
and on the day Isaac was weaned,
Abraham held a great feast.
But Sarah saw that the son whom Hagar the Egyptian,
had borne to Abraham,
was mocking,
and she said to Abraham,
“Get rid of that slave woman and her son,
for that woman’s son will never share in the inheritance with my son Isaac.”
The matter distressed Abraham greatly because it concerned his son.
But God said to him,
“Do not be so distressed about the boy,
and your slave woman.
Listen to whatever Sarah tells you,
because it is through Isaac that your offspring will be reckoned.
I will make the son of the slave into a nation also,
because he is your offspring.”
Early the next morning Abraham,
and took some food and a skin of water and gave them to Hagar.
He set them on her shoulders and then sent them off.
She went on her way and wandered in the Desert of Beersheba.
When the water in the skin was gone,
she put the boy under one of the bushes.
Then she went off and sat down,
about a bowshot away,
so she will see the death of the child.
And as she sat there, she began to sob.
God heard the boy crying,
and the angel of God called to Hagar from heaven,
and said to her,
“What is the matter, Hagar?
Do not be afraid;
God has heard the boy crying as he lies there.
Lift the boy up and take him by the hand,
for I will make him into a great nation.”
Then God opened her eyes,
and she saw a well of water.
So she went and filled the skin with water and gave the boy a drink.
God was with the boy as he grew up.
He lived in the desert,
and became an archer.
While he was living in the Desert of Paran,
his mother got a wife for him from Egypt.
At that time Abimelek and Phicol,
the commander of his forces,
said to Abraham,
“God is with you in everything you do.
Now swear to me here before God that you will not deal falsely with me
or my children or my descendants.
And the same kindness I have shown to you,
Abraham said,
“I swear it.”
Then Abraham complained to Abimelek about a well of water that Abimelek’s servants had seized.
Abimelek said,
“I don’t know who has done this.
You did not tell me,
and I heard about it only today.”
So Abraham brought sheep and cattle and gave them to Abimelek,
and the two men made a treaty.
Abraham set apart seven ewe lambs from the flock.
And Abimelek asked Abraham,
“What is the meaning of these seven ewe lambs you have set apart by themselves?”
He replied,
“Accept these seven lambs from my hand as a witness that I dug this well.”
So that place was called Beersheba,
because the two men swore an oath there.
After the treaty had been made at Beersheba,
Abimelek and Phicol the commander of his forces,
returned to the land of the Philistines.
Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beersheba,
and there he called on the name of the Lord,
the Eternal God.
And Abraham stayed in the land of the Philistines for a long time.
Some time later God tested Abraham.
He said to him,
“Abraham!”
he replied,
“Here I am.”
Then God said,
“Take your son,
your only son,
whom you love, Isaac,
and go to the region of Moriah.
Sacrifice him there as a burnt offering on a mountain I will show you.”
Early the next morning Abraham got up
and loaded his donkey.
He took with him two of his servants and his son Isaac.
When he had cut enough wood for the burnt offering,
he set out for the place God had told him about.
On the third day Abraham looked up and saw the place in the distance.
He said to his servants,
“Stay here with the donkey,
while I and the boy go over there.
We will worship and then we will come back to you.”
Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and placed it on his son Isaac.
He himself carried the fire and the knife.
Isaac spoke up and said to his father Abraham,
“Father?”
Abraham replied,
“Yes, my son.”
“The fire and wood are here,”
Isaac said,
“but where is the lamb for the burnt offering?”
Abraham answered,
“God himself will provide the lamb for the burnt offering,
my son.”
And the two of them went on together.
When they reached the place God had told him about,
Abraham built an altar there,
He arranged the wood.
He bound his son Isaac,
and laid him on top of the wood,
on the altar.
Then Abraham reached out his hand,
took the knife to slay his son.
But the angel of the Lord called out to him from heaven,
“Abraham! Abraham!”
he replied,
“Here I am.”
he said,
“Do not lay a hand on the boy.”
“Do not do anything to him.
Now I know that you fear God,
because you have not withheld from me your son,
your only son.”
Abraham looked up;
and there in a thicket he saw a ram caught by its horns.
He went over and took the ram and sacrificed it as a burnt offering,
instead of his son.
So Abraham called that place.
The Lord Will Provide.
And to this day,
it is said,
“On the mountain of the Lord it will be provided.”
The angel of the Lord called to Abraham from heaven a second time,
and said,
“I swear by myself,
declares the Lord,
that because you have done this,
and have not withheld your son,
your only son.
I will surely bless you,
and make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky,
and as the sand on the seashore.
Your descendants will take possession of the cities of their enemies;
and through your offspring all nations on earth will be blessed,
because you have obeyed me.”
Then Abraham returned to his servants,
and they set off together for Beersheba.
And Abraham stayed in Beersheba.
Some time later Abraham was told,
“Milkah is also a mother; she has borne sons to your brother Nahor:
Uz the firstborn,
Buz his brother,
Kemuel the father of Aram,
Kesed,
Hazo,
Pildash,
Jidlaph
and
Bethuel.”
Bethuel became the father of Rebekah.
Milkah bore these eight sons to Abraham’s brother Nahor.
His concubine, whose name was Reumah, also had sons
Tebah,
Gaham,
Tahash
and
Maakah.
Sarah lived to be a hundred and twenty-seven years old.
She died at Kiriath Arba,
(that is, Hebron),
in the land of Canaan.
Abraham went to mourn for Sarah and to weep over her.
Then Abraham rose from beside his dead wife,
and spoke to the Hittites.
He said,
“I am a foreigner and stranger among you.
Sell me some property for a burial site here so I can bury my dead.”
The Hittites replied to Abraham,
“Sir,
You are a mighty prince among us.
Bury your dead in the choicest of our tombs.
None of us will refuse you his tomb for burying your dead.”
Then Abraham rose and bowed down before the people of the land the Hittites.
He said to them,
“If you are willing to let me bury my dead,
then listen to me and intercede with Ephron son of Zohar on my behalf,
so he will sell me the cave which belongs to him,
of Machpelah,
and is at the end of his field.
Ask him to sell it to me for the full price as a burial site among you.”
Ephron the Hittite was sitting among his people,
and he replied to Abraham in the hearing of all the Hittites,
who had come to the gate of his city.
He said,
“No, my lord,
listen to me,
I give you the field,
and I give you the cave that is in it.
I give it to you in the presence of my people.
Bury your dead.”
Again Abraham bowed down before the people of the land.
and he said to Ephron in their hearing,
“If you will.
I will pay the price of the field.
Accept it from me so I can bury my dead there.”
Ephron answered Abraham,
“My lord,
listen to me,
the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver,
what is that between you and me?
Bury your dead.”
Abraham agreed to Ephron’s terms,
and weighed out for him the price he had named in the hearing of the Hittites,
four hundred shekels of silver,
according to the weight current among the merchants.
Ephron’s field,
in Machpelah,
near Mamre,
both the field and the cave in it,
and all the trees in that farm,
within the borders,
was deeded to Abraham as his property in the presence of all the Hittites,
who had come to the gate of the city.
Afterward Abraham buried Sarah his wife,
in the cave in the field of Machpelah near Mamre
(which is at Hebron)
in the land of Canaan.
So the field and the cave in it were deeded to Abraham by the Hittites,
as a burial site.
Abraham was now very old,
and the Lord had blessed him in every way.
He said to the senior servant in his household,
the one in charge of all that he had,
“Put your hand under my thigh.
I want you to swear by the Lord,
the God of heaven and the God of earth,
that you will not get a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites,
among whom I am living.
Go to my country,
my own relatives,
and get a wife for my son Isaac.”
The servant asked him,
“What if the woman is unwilling to come back with me to this land?
Shall I then take your son back to the country you came from?”
Abraham said,
“Make sure that you do not take my son back there”
“The Lord,
the God of heaven,
who brought me out of my father’s household,
and my native land,
who spoke to me and promised me on oath,
saying,
‘To your offspring I will give this land’ 
he will send his angel before you,
so that you can get a wife for my son from there.
If the woman is unwilling to come back with you,
then you will be released from this oath of mine.
Only do not take my son back there.”
So the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master,
and swore an oath to him concerning this matter.
Then the servant left taking with him ten of his master’s camels,
loaded with all kinds of good things from his master.
He set out for Aram Naharaim and made his way to the town of Nahor.
He had the camels kneel down near the well outside the town,
it was toward evening,
the time the women go out to draw water.
Then he prayed,
“Lord,
God of my master Abraham,
make me successful today,
and show kindness to my master Abraham.
See,
I am standing beside this spring,
and the daughters of the towns people are coming out to draw water.
May it be that when I say to a young woman,
‘Please let down your jar that I may have a drink,’
and she says,
‘Drink,
and I’ll water your camels too’
let her be the one you have chosen for your servant Isaac.
By this I will know that you have shown kindness to my master.”
Before he had finished praying,
Rebekah came out with her jar on her shoulder.
She was the daughter of Bethuel son of Milkah,
who was the wife of Abraham’s brother Nahor.
The woman was very beautiful,
a virgin,
no man had ever slept with her.
She went down to the spring,
filled her jar and came up again.
The servant hurried to meet her,
and said,
“Please give me a little water from your jar.”
“Drink,
my lord,”
she said,
and quickly lowered the jar to her hands and gave him a drink.
After she had given him a drink,
she said,
“I’ll draw water for your camels too,
until they have had enough to drink.”
So she quickly emptied her jar into the trough,
ran back to the well to draw more water,
and drew enough for all his camels.
Without saying a word,
the man watched her closely to learn,
whether or not the Lord had made his journey successful.
When the camels had finished drinking,
the man took out a gold nose ring,
weighing a beka,
and two gold bracelets weighing ten shekels.
Then he asked,
“Whose daughter are you?
Please tell me,
is there room in your father’s house for us to spend the night?”
She answered him,
“I am the daughter of Bethuel,
the son that Milkah,
bore to Nahor.”
And she added,
“We have plenty of straw and fodder,
as well as room for you to spend the night.”
Then the man bowed down and worshiped the Lord,
saying,
“Praise be to the Lord,
the God of my master Abraham,
who has not abandoned his kindness and faithfulness to my master.
the Lord has led me on the journey to the house of my master’s relatives.”
The young woman ran,
and told her mother’s household about these things.
Now Rebekah had a brother,
named Laban.
Laban hurried out to the man at the spring.
As soon as he had seen the nose ring,
and the bracelets on his sister’s arms,
and had heard Rebekah tell what the man said to her,
he went out to the man.
And found him standing by the camels near the spring.
He said,
“Come,
you who are blessed by the Lord,
Why are you standing out here?
I have prepared the house and a place for the camels.”
So the man went to the house,
and the camels were unloaded.
and Straw and fodder were brought for the camels.
and water for him and his men to wash their feet.
Then food was set before him,
but he said,
“I will not eat until I have told you what I have to say.”
Laban said,
“Then tell us.”
So he said,
“I am Abraham’s servant.
The Lord has blessed my master abundantly,
and he has become wealthy.
He has given him sheep and cattle,
silver and gold,
male and female servants,
and camels and donkeys.
My master’s wife Sarah has borne him a son in her old age,
and he has given him everything he owns.
And my master made me swear an oath,
and said,
‘You must not get a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites,
in whose land I live,
but go to my father’s family and to my own clan,
and get a wife for my son.’
“Then I asked my master,
‘What if the woman will not come back with me?’
He replied,
‘The Lord before whom I have walked faithfully, will send his angel with you,
and make your journey a success.
So that you can get a wife for my son from my own clan and from my father’s family.
You will be released from my oath,
when you go to my clan,
and if they refuse to give her to you then you will be released from my oath.’
“When I came to the spring today,
I said,
‘Lord,
God of my master Abraham,
please grant success to the journey on which I have come.
See,
I am standing beside this spring.
If a young woman comes out to draw water',
and I say to her,
'Please let me drink a little water from your jar','
and if she says to me,
“Drink,
and I’ll draw water for your camels too,”
let her be the one the Lord has chosen for my master’s son.’
“Before I finished praying in my heart,
Rebekah came out,
with her jar on her shoulder.
She went down to the spring and drew water.
And I said to her,
‘Please give me a drink.’
“She quickly lowered her jar from her shoulder
and said,
‘Drink,
and I’ll water your camels too.’
So I drank,
and she watered the camels also.
“I asked her,
‘Whose daughter are you?’
“She said,
‘The daughter of Bethuel,
son of Nahor,
whom Milkah bore to him.’
“Then I put the ring in her nose,
and the bracelets on her arms,
and I bowed down and worshiped the Lord.
I praised the Lord,
the God of my master Abraham,
who had led me on the right road to get the granddaughter of my master’s brother for his son.
Now if you will show kindness and faithfulness to my master,
tell me;
and if not,
tell me so I may know which way to turn.”
Laban and Bethuel answered,
“This is from the Lord;
we can say nothing to you one way or the other.
Here is Rebekah;
take her and go,
and let her become the wife of your master’s son,
as the Lord has directed.”
When Abraham’s servant heard what they said,
he bowed down to the ground before the Lord.
Then the servant brought out gold and silver jewelry,
and articles of clothing and gave them to Rebekah.
He also gave costly gifts to her brother and to her mother.
Then he and the men who were with him ate and drank and spent the night there.
When they got up the next morning, he said,
“Send me on my way to my master.”
But her brother and her mother replied,
“Let the young woman remain with us ten days or so;
then you may go.”
But he said to them,
“Do not detain me,
now that the Lord has granted success to my journey.
Send me on my way so I may go to my master.”
Then they said,
“Let’s call the young woman and ask her about it.”
So they called Rebekah and asked her,
“Will you go with this man?”
she said,
“I will go.”
So they sent their sister Rebekah on her way,
along with her nurse,
and Abraham’s servant and his men.
And they blessed Rebekah and said to her,
“Our sister,
may you increase to thousands upon thousands,
may your offspring possess the cities of their enemies.”
Then Rebekah got ready,
and her attendants,
mounted the camels,
and went back with the man.
So the servant took Rebekah and left.
Now Isaac had come from Beer Lahai Roi,
for he was living in the Negev.
He went out to the field one evening to meditate,
and as he looked up,
he saw camels approaching.
Rebekah also looked up,
and when she saw Isaac.
She got down from her camel,
and asked the servant,
“Who is that man in the field coming to meet us?”
the servant answered,
“He is my master.”
So she took her veil and covered herself.
Then the servant told Isaac all he had done.
Isaac brought her into the tent of his mother Sarah,
and he married Rebekah,
and she became his wife,
and he loved her;
and Isaac was comforted after his mother’s death.
Abraham had taken another wife,
whose name was Keturah.
She bore him Zimran,
Jokshan,
Medan,
Midian,
Ishbak
and
Shuah.
Jokshan was the father of Sheba and Dedan;
the descendants of Dedan were the Ashurites,
the Letushites and the Leummites.
The sons of Midian were
Ephah,
Epher,
Hanok,
Abida
and Eldaah.
All these were descendants of Keturah.
Abraham left everything he owned to Isaac.
But while he was still living,
he gave gifts to the sons of his concubines,
and sent them away from his son Isaac,
to the land of the east.
Abraham lived a hundred and seventy five years.
Then Abraham breathed his last and died at a good old age,
an old man and full of years,
and he was gathered to his people.
His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him,
in the cave of Machpelah near Mamre,
in the field of Ephron,
son of Zohar the Hittite,
the field Abraham had bought from the Hittites.
There Abraham was buried with his wife Sarah.
After Abraham’s death,
God blessed his son Isaac,
who then lived near Beer Lahai Roi.
This is the account of the family line of Ishmael,
Abraham’s son,
whom Sarah’s slave, Hagar the Egyptian, bore to Abraham.
These are the names of the sons of Ishmael,
listed in the order of their birth:
the firstborn of Ishmael was Nebaioth,
Kedar,
Adbeel,
Mibsam,
Mishma,
Dumah,
Massa,
Hadad,
Tema,
Jetur,
Naphish
and Kedemah.
These were the sons of Ishmael,
and these are the names of the twelve tribal rulers,
according to their settlements and camps.
Ishmael lived a hundred and thirty-seven years.
He breathed his last and died,
and he was gathered to his people.
His descendants settled in the area from Havilah to Shur,
near the eastern border of Egypt,
as you go toward Ashur.
And they lived in hostility toward all the tribes related to them.
This is the account of the family line of Isaac,
Abraham’s son,
Abraham became the father of Isaac,
and Isaac was forty years old when he married Rebekah daughter of Bethuel,
the Aramean from Paddan Aram,
and sister of Laban the Aramean.
Isaac prayed to the Lord on behalf of his wife,
because she was childless.
The Lord answered his prayer,
and his wife Rebekah became pregnant.
The babies jostled each other within her;
and she said,
“Why is this happening to me?”
So she went to inquire of the Lord.
The Lord said to her,
“Two nations are in your womb,
and two peoples from within you will be separated;
one people will be stronger than the other;
and the older will serve the younger.”
When the time came for her to give birth,
there were twin boys in her womb.
The first to come out was red,
and his whole body was like a hairy garment;
so they named him Esau.
After this,
his brother came out with his hand grasping Esau’s heel;
so he was named Jacob.
Isaac was sixty years old when Rebekah gave birth to them.
The boys grew up,
and Esau became a skillful hunter,
a man of the open country.
While Jacob was content to stay at home among the tents.
Isaac loved Esau,
bacause he had a taste for wild game,
but Rebekah loved Jacob.
Once when Jacob was cooking some stew,
Esau came in from the open country,
famished.
Esau said to Jacob,
“Quick, let me have some of that red stew because I’m famished!”
That is why he was also called Edom.
Jacob replied,
“First sell me your birthright.”
Esau said,
“Look,
I am about to die,
What good is the birthright to me?”
But Jacob said,
“Swear to me first.”
So he swore an oath to him,
selling his birthright to Jacob.
Then Jacob gave Esau some bread and some lentil stew.
He ate and drank, and then got up and left.
So Esau despised his birthright.
Now there was a famine in the land besides the previous,
famine in Abraham’s time.
And Isaac went to Abimelek,
king of the Philistines in Gerar.
The Lord appeared to Isaac and said,
“Do not go down to Egypt;
live in the land where I tell you to live.
Stay in this land for a while, 
and I will be with you and will bless you.
For to you and your descendants I will give all these lands,
and will confirm the oath I swore to your father Abraham.
I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky,
and will give them all these lands.
And through your offspring all nations on earth will be blessed;
because Abraham obeyed me and did everything I required of him,
keeping my commands,
my decrees and my instructions.”
So Isaac stayed in Gerar.
When the men of that place asked him about his wife,
he said,
“She is my sister,”
because he was afraid to say,
“She is my wife.”
He thought,
“The men of this place might kill me on account of Rebekah,
because she is beautiful.”
When Isaac had been there a long time,
Abimelek king of the Philistines looked down from a window and saw Isaac caressing his wife Rebekah.
So Abimelek summoned Isaac and said,
“She is really your wife.
Why did you say,
‘She is my sister’?”
Isaac answered him,
“Because I thought,
I might lose my life on account of her.”
Then Abimelek said,
“What is this you have done to us?
One of the men might well have slept with your wife,
and you would have brought guilt upon us.”
So Abimelek gave orders to all the people,
“Anyone who harms this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.”
Isaac planted crops in that land and the same year reaped a hundredfold.
because the Lord blessed him.
and the man became rich,
and his wealth continued to grow,
until he became very wealthy.
He had so many flocks and herds,
and servants
that the Philistines envied him.
So all the wells that his father’s servants had dug in the time of his father Abraham,
the Philistines stopped up,
filling them with earth.
Then Abimelek said to Isaac,
“Move away from us;
you have become too powerful for us.”
So Isaac moved away from there,
and encamped in the Valley of Gerar,
where he settled.
Isaac reopened the wells that had been dug in the time of his father Abraham,
which the Philistines had stopped up after Abraham died.
And he gave them the same names his father had given them.
Isaac’s servants dug in the valley,
and discovered a well of fresh water there.
But the herders of Gerar quarreled with those of Isaac and said,
“The water is ours!”
So he named the well Esek,
because they disputed with him.
Then they dug another well,
but they quarreled over that one also,
so he named it Sitnah.
He moved on from there,
and dug another well,
and no one quarreled over it.
He named it Rehoboth,
saying,
“Now the Lord has given us room and we will flourish in the land.”
From there he went up to Beersheba.
That night the Lord appeared to him and said,
“I am the God of your father Abraham.
Do not be afraid,
for I am with you;
I will bless you and will increase the number of your descendants for the sake of my servant Abraham.”
Isaac built an altar there and called on the name of the Lord.
There he pitched his tent,
and there his servants dug a well.
Meanwhile, Abimelek had come to him from Gerar, with Ahuzzath his personal adviser,
and Phicol the commander of his forces.
Isaac asked them,
“Why have you come to me,
since you were hostile to me and sent me away?”
They answered,
“We saw clearly,
that the Lord was with you.
So we said,
‘There ought to be a sworn agreement between us’,
us and you.
Let us make a treaty with you that you will do us no harm,
just as we did not harm you,
but always treated you well,
and sent you away peacefully.
And now you are blessed by the Lord.”
Isaac then made a feast for them,
and they ate and drank.
Early the next morning the men swore an oath to each other.
Then Isaac sent them on their way,
and they went away peacefully.
That day,
Isaac’s servants came,
and told him about the well they had dug.
They said,
“We’ve found water!”
He called it Shibah;
and to this day the name of the town has been Beersheba.
When Esau was forty years old,
he married Judith daughter of Beeri the Hittite,
and also Basemath daughter of Elon the Hittite.
They were a source of grief to Isaac and Rebekah.
When Isaac was old,
and his eyes were so weak that he could no longer see,
he called for Esau his older son,
and said to him,
“My son.”
he answered,
“Here I am.”
Isaac said,
“I am now an old man,
and don’t know the day of my death.
Now then get your equipment,
your quiver and bow,
and go out to the open country to hunt some wild game for me.
Prepare me the kind of tasty food I like,
and bring it to me to eat,
so that I may give you my blessing before I die.”
Now Rebekah was listening as Isaac spoke to his son Esau.
When Esau left for the open country to hunt game and bring it back,
Rebekah said to her son Jacob,
“Look,
I overheard your father say to your brother Esau,
‘Bring me some game,
and prepare me some tasty food to eat,
so that I may give you my blessing in the presence of the Lord before I die.’
Now, my son, listen carefully and do what I tell you.
Go out to the flock and bring me two choice young goats,
so I can prepare some tasty food for your father,
just the way he likes it. 
Then take it to your father to eat,
so that he may give you his blessing before he dies.”
Jacob said to Rebekah his mother,
“But my brother Esau is a hairy man,
while I have smooth skin.
What if my father touches me?
I would appear to be tricking him and would bring down a curse on myself rather than a blessing.”
His mother said to him,
“My son,
let the curse fall on me.
Just do what I say; go and get them for me.”
So he went and got them and brought them to his mother,
and she prepared some tasty food,
just the way his father liked it.
Then Rebekah took the best clothes of Esau her older son,
which she had in the house,
and put them on her younger son Jacob.
She also covered his hands and the smooth part of his neck with the goatskins.
Then she handed to her son Jacob the tasty food and the bread she had made.
He went to his father and said,
“My father!”
He answered,
“Yes, my son, 
and who is it?”
Jacob said to his father,
“I am Esau your firstborn.
I have done as you told me.
Please sit up and eat some of my game,
so that you may give me your blessing.”
Isaac asked his son,
“How did you find it so quickly, my son?”
He replied,
“The Lord your God gave me success.”
Then Isaac said to Jacob,
“Come near so I can touch you,
my son,
to know whether you really are my son Esau or not.”
Jacob went close to his father Isaac,
who touched him and said,
“The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau.” 
He did not recognize him,
for his hands were hairy,
like those of his brother Esau.
So he proceeded to bless him.
he asked,
“Are you really my son Esau?”
He replied,
“I am.”
Then he said,
“My son, bring me some of your game to eat,
so that I may give you my blessing.”
Jacob brought it to him and he ate,
and he brought some wine and he drank.
Then his father Isaac said to him,
“Come here,
my son,
and kiss me.”
So he went to him and kissed him.
When Isaac caught the smell of his clothes,
he blessed him and said,
“The smell of my son is like the smell of a field that the Lord has blessed.
May God give you heaven’s dew,
and earth’s richness,
an abundance of grain and new wine.
May nations serve you and peoples bow down to you.
Be lord over your brothers,
and may the sons of your mother bow down to you.
May those who curse you be cursed,
and those who bless you be blessed.”
After Isaac finished blessing Jacob,
and Jacob had scarcely left his father’s presence,
his brother Esau came in from hunting.
He too prepared some tasty food,
and brought it to his father.
Then he said to him,
“My father, please sit up and eat meat,
so that you may give me your blessing.”
His father Isaac asked him,
“Who are you?”
He answered,
“I am your your firstborn son, Esau.”
Isaac trembled violently and said,
“Who was it, then, that hunted game and brought it to me?
and I ate it just before you came,
and I blessed him?
and indeed he will be blessed!”
When Esau heard his father’s words,
he burst out with a loud and bitter cry and said to his father,
“Bless me too,
my father!”
But he said,
“Your brother came deceitfully and took your blessing.”
Esau said,
“Isn’t he rightly named Jacob?
This is the second time he has taken advantage of me.
He took my birthright,
and now he’s taken my blessing!”
he asked,
“Haven’t you reserved any blessing for me?”
Isaac answered Esau,
“I have made him lord over you,
and have made all his relatives his servants,
and I have sustained him with grain and new wine.
So what can I possibly do for you,
my son?”
Esau said to his father,
“Do you have only one blessing,
my father?
Bless me too,
my father!”
Then Esau wept aloud.
You will live by the sword and you will serve your brother.
When you grow restless,  you will throw his yoke from off your neck.”
Esau held a grudge against Jacob because of the blessing his father had given him.
He said to himself,
“The days of mourning for my father are near,
then I will kill my brother Jacob.”
When Rebekah was told what her older son Esau had said,
she sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him,
“Your brother Esau is planning to avenge himself by killing you.
Now then, my son, do what I say:
Flee at once to my brother Laban in Harran.
Stay with him for a while until your brother’s fury subsides.
When your brother is no longer angry with you and forgets what you did to him,
I’ll send word for you to come back from there.
Why should I lose both of you in one day?”
Then Rebekah said to Isaac,
“I’m disgusted with living because of these Hittite women.
If Jacob takes a wife from among the women of this land,
like these women from Hittite,
wht  will be the worth of my life?”
So Isaac called for Jacob and blessed him.
and then he commanded him,
“Do not marry a Canaanite woman.
Go at once to Paddan Aram,
to the house of your mother’s father Bethuel.
Take a wife for yourself  from among the daughters of Laban your mother’s brother.
May God Almighty bless you,
and make you fruitful and increase your numbers,
until you become a community of peoples.
May he give you the blessing given to Abraham,
you and your descendants,
so that you may take possession of the land where you now reside as a foreigner,
the land God gave to Abraham.” 
Then Isaac sent Jacob on his way
and he went to Paddan Aram,
to Laban son of Bethuel the Aramean,
the brother of Rebekah,
who was the mother of Jacob and Esau.
Now Esau learned that,
Isaac had blessed Jacob and had sent him to Paddan Aram,
to take a wife from there,
and that when he blessed him he commanded him,
“Do not marry a Canaanite woman,”
and that Jacob had obeyed his father and mother and had gone to Paddan Aram.
Esau then realized how displeasing the Canaanite women were to his father Isaac,
so he went to Ishmael and married Mahalath,
daughter of Ishmael son of Abraham,
the sister of Nebaioth,
in addition to the wives he already had.
Jacob left Beersheba and set out for Harran.
When he reached a certain place,
he stopped for the night because the sun had set.
Taking one of the stones there,
he put it under his head and lay down to sleep.
He had a dream in which he saw a stairway resting on the earth,
with its top reaching to heaven,
and the angels of God were ascending and descending on it.
There above it stood the Lord and he said,
“I am the Lord,
the God of your father Abraham and the God of Isaac.
I will give you the land on which you are lying,
with your descendants.
Your descendants will be like the dust of the earth,
and you will spread out to the west and to the east,
to the north and to the south.
All peoples on earth will be blessed through you and your offspring.
I am with you and will watch over you wherever you go,
and I will bring you back to this land.
I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.”
When Jacob awoke from his sleep and he thought,
“Surely the Lord is in this place,
and I was not aware of it.”
He was afraid and said,
“How awesome is this place!
This is none other than the house of God;
this is the gate of heaven.”
Early the next morning Jacob,
and took the stone he had placed under his head,
and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on top of it.
He called that place Bethel,
the city used to be called Luz.
Then Jacob made a vow, saying,
“If God will be with me and will watch over me on this journey I am taking,
and will give me food to eat and clothes to wear,
so that I return safely to my father’s household,
then the Lord will be my God,
and this stone that I have set up as a pillar will be God’s house;
and of all that you give me,
I will give you a tenth.”
Then Jacob continued on his journey and came to the land of the eastern peoples.
There he saw a well in the open country,
with three flocks of sheep lying near the well,
because the flocks were watered from that well.
The stone over the mouth of the well was large.
When all the flocks were gathered there,
the shepherds would roll the stone away from the well’s mouth and water the sheep.
Then they would return the stone to its place over the mouth of the well.
Jacob asked the shepherds,
“my brothers,
where are you from?”
They replied
“we’re from Harran.”
He said to them,
“Do you know Laban Nahor’s grandson?”
they answered,
“We know him.”
Then Jacob asked them,
“Is he well?”
They answered,
“he is well, and here comes his daughter Rachel,
with the sheep.”
he said,
“Look,
it is still early,
it is not time for the flocks to be gathered.
Water the sheep and take them back to pasture.”
they replied,
“We can’t until all the flocks are gathered,
and the stone has been rolled away from the mouth of the well.
Then we will water the sheep.”
While he was still talking with them,
Rachel came with her father’s sheep,
for she was a shepherd.
When Jacob saw Rachel daughter of his uncle Laban,
with Laban’s sheep,
he went over and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well,
and watered his uncle’s sheep.
Then Jacob kissed Rachel and began to weep aloud.
Jacob said to Rachel,
"I am a relative to your father, and I am the son of Rebekah."
So she ran and told her father.
As soon as Laban heard the news about Jacob, his sister’s son,
he hurried to meet him.
and brought him to his home.
And there Jacob told him all these things.
Then Laban said to him,
“You are my own flesh and blood.”
He stayed with him for a whole month,
Laban said to Jacob,
“Should you work for me for nothing because you are a relative of mine?
Tell me what your wages should be.”
Laban had two daughters,
the name of the older was Leah,
the name of the younger was Rachel.
Leah had weak eyes,
but Rachel had a lovely figure and was beautiful.
Jacob was in love with Rachel.
He said to Laban,
“I’ll work for you seven years, in return for your younger daughter Rachel.”
Laban said,
“It’s better that I give her to you than to some other man.
Stay here with me.” 
So Jacob served seven years to get Rachel,
but they seemed like only a few days to him because of his love for her.
Then Jacob said to Laban,
“Give me my wife.
My time is completed,
and I want to make love to her.”
So Laban brought together all the people of the place and gave a feast.
But when evening came,
Laban brought his daughter Leah to Jacob,
and Jacob made love to her.
And Laban gave his servant Zilpah to his daughter as her attendant.
When morning came,
there was Leah!
So Jacob said to Laban,
“What is this you have done to me?
didn’t I served you for Rachel?
Why have you deceived me?”
Laban replied,
“It is not our custom here to give the younger daughter in marriage before the older one.
Finish this Leah’s bridal seven days;
then we will give you the younger one also,
in return for another seven years of work.”
And Jacob did so.
He finished the week with Leah,
and then Laban gave him his daughter Rachel to be his wife.
Laban gave his servant Bilhah to his daughter Rachel as her attendant.
Jacob made love to Rachel also,
and his love for Rachel was greater than his love for Leah.
And he worked for Laban another seven years.
When the Lord saw that Leah was not loved,
he enabled her to conceive,
but Rachel remained childless.
Leah became pregnant and gave birth to a son. 
She named him Reuben,
for she said,
“It is because the Lord has seen my misery.
Surely my husband will love me now.”
She conceived again,
she gave birth to a son,
and she said,
“Because the Lord heard that I am not loved,
he gave me this one too.”
So she named him Simeon.
Again she conceived,
she gave birth to a son,
and she said,
“Now at last my husband will become attached to me,
because I have borne him three sons.”
So he was named Levi.
She conceived again,
and she gave birth to a son,
and she said,
“This time I will praise the Lord.”
So she named him Judah.
Then she stopped having children.
When Rachel saw that she was not bearing Jacob any children,
she became jealous of her sister.
So she said to Jacob,
“Give me children, or I’ll die!”
Jacob became angry with her and said,
“Am I in the place of God who has kept you from having children?”
Then Rachel said to Jacob,
“Here is Bilhah, my servant.
Sleep with her,
so that she can bear children for me and I too can build a family through her.”
So she gave him her servant Bilhah as a wife.
Jacob slept with her.
Bilhah became pregnant and bore him a son.
Then Rachel said,
“God has vindicated me,
he has listened to my plea and given me a son.”
Because of this she named him Dan.
Rachel’s servant Bilhah conceived again and bore Jacob a second son.
Then Rachel said,
“I have had a great struggle with my sister,
and I have won.”
So she named him Naphtali.
When Leah saw that she had stopped having children,
she took her servant Zilpah and gave her to Jacob as a wife.
Leah’s servant Zilpah bore Jacob a son.
Then Leah said,
“What good fortune!”
So she named him Gad.
Leah’s servant Zilpah bore Jacob a second son.
Then Leah said,
“How happy I am! The women will call me happy.”
So she named him Asher.
During wheat harvest,
Reuben went out into the fields and found some mandrake plants,
which he brought to his mother Leah.
Rachel said to Leah,
“Please give me some of your son’s mandrakes.”
But she said to her,
“Wasn’t it enough that you took away my husband?
Will you take my son’s mandrakes too?”
Rachel said,
“He can sleep with you tonight in return for your son’s mandrakes.”
So when Jacob came in from the fields that evening, Leah went out to meet him,
and she said,
“You must sleep with me,
because I have hired you with my son’s mandrakes.”
So he slept with her that night.
God listened to Leah,
and she became pregnant and bore Jacob a fifth son.
Then Leah said,
“God has rewarded me for giving my servant to my husband.”
So she named him Issachar.
Leah conceived again and bore Jacob a sixth son.
Then Leah said,
“God has presented me with a precious gift.
This time my husband will treat me with honor, because I have borne him six sons.”
So she named him Zebulun.
Some time later she gave birth to a daughter and named her Dinah.
Then God remembered Rachel, he listened to her and enabled her to conceive.
She became pregnant and gave birth to a son and said,
“God has taken away my disgrace.”
She named him Joseph,
and said,
“May the Lord add to me another son.”
After Rachel gave birth to Joseph,
Jacob said to Laban,
“Send me on my way so I can go back to my own homeland.
Give me my wives and children for whom I have served you,
You know how much work I’ve done for you.”
But Laban said to him,
“If I have found favor in your eyes,
I have learned by divination that the Lord has blessed me because of you,
name your wages, and I will pay them.”
Jacob said to him,
“You know how I have worked for you and how your livestock has fared under my care.
The little you had before I came has increased greatly,
and the Lord has blessed you wherever I have been.
But now, when may I do something for my own household?”
Laban asked,
“What shall I give you?”
Jacob replied,
“Don’t give me anything,
if you will do this one thing for me,
I will go on tending your flocks and watching over them.
Let me go through all your flocks today,
and remove from them every speckled or spotted sheep,
every dark-colored lamb and every spotted or speckled goat.
They will be my wages.
And my honesty will testify for me in the future,
whenever you check on the wages you have paid me.
Any goat in my possession that is not speckled or spotted, or any lamb that is not dark-colored, will be considered stolen.”
Laban said,
“Let it be as you have said.”
That same day he removed all the male goats that were streaked or spotted,
and all the speckled or spotted female goats all that had white on them and all the dark-colored lambs, and he placed them in the care of his sons.
Then Laban put a three-day journey between himself and Jacob,
while Jacob continued to tend the rest of Laban’s flocks.
Jacob, however, took fresh-cut branches from poplar, almond and plane trees
and made white stripes on them by peeling the bark and exposing the white inner wood of the branches.
Then he placed the peeled branches in all the watering troughs,
so that they would be directly in front of the flocks when they came to drink.
The flocks mated in front of the branches.
And they bore young that were streaked or speckled or spotted.
Jacob set apart the young of the flock by themselves,
but made the rest face the streaked and dark-colored animals that belonged to Laban.
Thus he made separate flocks for himself and did not put them with Laban’s animals.
Whenever the stronger females were in heat, Jacob would place the branches in the troughs in front of the animals so they would mate near the branches,
but if the animals were weak, he would not place them there.
So the weak animals went to Laban and the strong ones to Jacob.
In this way Jacob grew exceedingly prosperous and came to own large flocks,
female and male servants, and camels and donkeys.
Jacob heard that Laban’s sons were saying,
“Jacob has taken everything our father owned and has gained all this wealth from what belonged to our father.”
And Jacob noticed that Laban’s attitude toward him was not what it had been.
Then the Lord said to Jacob,
“Go back to the land of your fathers where you were born, and I will be with you.”
So Jacob sent word to Rachel and Leah to come out to the fields where his flocks were.
He said to them,
“I see that your father’s attitude toward me is not what it was before,
but the God of my father has been with me.
You know that I’ve worked for your father with all my strength.
yet your father has cheated me by changing my wages ten times.
However, God has not allowed him to harm me.
If he said,
‘The speckled ones will be your wages,’
then all the flocks gave birth to speckled young,
and if he said,
‘The streaked ones will be your wages,’
then all the flocks bore streaked young.
God has taken away your father’s livestock and has given them to me.
In breeding season I once had a dream in which I looked up and saw that the male goats mating with the flock were streaked, speckled or spotted.
The angel of God said to me in the dream, ‘Jacob.’
I answered, ‘Here I am.’ 
And he said,
‘Look up and see that all the male goats mating with the flock are streaked, speckled or spotted, for I have seen all that Laban has been doing to you.
I am the God of Bethel,
where you anointed a pillar and where you made a vow to me.
Now leave this land at once and go back to your native land.
Then Rachel and Leah replied,
“Do we still have any share in the inheritance of our father’s estate?
Does he not regard us as foreigners?
he has sold us and has used up what was paid for us.
Surely all the wealth that God took away from our father belongs to us and our children. 
So do whatever God has told you.”
Then Jacob put his children and his wives on camels.
He drove all his livestock ahead of him,
with all the goods he had accumulated,
to go to his father Isaac in the land of Canaan.
When Laban had gone to shear his sheep,
Rachel stole her father’s household gods.
Jacob deceived Laban the Aramean by not telling him he was running away.
So he fled with all he had,
and he crossed the River,
and headed for the hill of Gilead.
On the third day Laban was told that Jacob had fled.
Taking his relatives with him.
and on the seventh day he caught up with him in the hill of Gilead.
Then God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream at night and said to him,
“Be careful not to say anything to Jacob, either good or bad.”
Jacob had pitched his tent in the hill.
Laban and his relatives camped there too.
Then Laban said to Jacob,
“What have you done?
and you’ve carried off my daughters like captives in war.
Why did you run off secretly and deceive me?
Why didn’t you tell me,
so I could send you away with joy and singing to the music of timbrels and harps.
You didn’t even let me kiss my grandchildren and my daughters goodbye.
You have done a foolish thing.
I have the power to harm you;
but last night the God of your father said to me,
‘Be careful not to say anything to Jacob, either good or bad.’
Now you have gone off because you longed to return to your father’s household.
But why did you steal my gods?”
Jacob answered Laban,
“I was afraid, because I thought you would take your daughters away from me by force.
But if you find anyone who has your gods, that person shall not live.
In the presence of our relatives, see for yourself whether there is anything of yours here with me; and if so, take it.”
Now Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen the gods.
So Laban went into Jacob’s tent and into Leah’s tent and into the tent of the two female servants, but he found nothing.
After he came out of Leah’s tent, he entered Rachel’s tent.
Now Rachel had taken the household gods and put them inside her camel’s saddle and was sitting on them.
Laban searched through everything in the tent but found nothing.
Rachel said to her father,
“Don’t be angry, my lord, that I cannot stand up in your presence; I’m having my period.”
So he searched but could not find the household gods.
Jacob was angry and took Laban to task.
Jacob asked Laban,
“What is my crime?
How have I wronged you that you hunt me down?
Now that you have searched through all my goods,
what have you found that belongs to your household?
Put it here in front of your relatives and mine,
and let them judge between the two of us.
“I have been with you for twenty years now.
Your sheep and goats have not miscarried, nor have I eaten rams from your flocks.
I did not bring you animals torn by wild beasts.
I bore the loss myself.
And you demanded payment from me for whatever was stolen by day or night.
This was my situation,
The heat consumed me in the daytime and the cold at night, and sleep fled from my eyes.
It was like this for the twenty years I was in your household.
I worked for you fourteen years for your two daughters and six years for your flocks,
and you changed my wages ten times.
If the God of my father,
the God of Abraham and the Fear of Isaac,
you would surely have sent me away empty-handed.
But God has seen my hardship and the toil of my hands,
and last night he rebuked you.”
Laban answered Jacob,
“The women are my daughters,
the children are my children,
and the flocks are my flocks.
All you see is mine.
Yet what can I do today about these daughters of mine,
or about the children they have borne?
Come now, let’s make a covenant, you and I, and let it serve as a witness between us.”
So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar.
He said to his relatives,
“Gather some stones.”
So they took stones and piled them in a heap, and they ate there by the heap.
Laban called it Jegar Sahadutha, and Jacob called it Galeed.
Laban said,
“This heap is a witness between you and me today.”
That is why it was called Galeed.
It was also called Mizpah,
because he said,
“May the Lord keep watch between you and me when we are away from each other.
If you mistreat my daughters or if you take any wives besides my daughters,
even though no one is with us, remember that God is a witness between you and me.”
Laban also said to Jacob,
“Here is this heap,
and here is this pillar I have set up between you and me.
This heap is a witness,
and this pillar is a witness,
that I will not go past this heap to your side to harm you,
and that you will not go past this heap and pillar to my side to harm me.
the God of Abraham,
and the God of Nahor,
the God of their father,
judge between us.”
So Jacob took an oath in the name of the Fear of his father Isaac.
He offered a sacrifice there in the hill and invited his relatives to a meal.
After they had eaten, they spent the night there.
Early the next morning Laban kissed his grandchildren and his daughters and blessed them.
Then he left and returned home.
Jacob also went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
When Jacob saw them, he said,
“This is the camp of God!”
So he named that place Mahanaim.
Jacob sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Esau in the land of Seir, the country of Edom.
He instructed them:
“This is what you are to say to my lord Esau,
‘Your servant Jacob says,
I have been staying with Laban and have remained there till now.
I have cattle and donkeys,
and male and female servants.
Now I am sending this message to my lord, that I may find favor in your eyes.
When the messengers returned to Jacob, they said,
“We went to your brother Esau and now he is coming to meet you,
and four hundred men are with him.”
Jacob was great fear and distress,
he divided the people who were with him into two groups,
and the flocks and herds and camels as well.
He thought,
“If Esau comes and attacks one group,
the group that is left may escape.”
Then Jacob prayed,
“O God of my father Abraham,
God of my father Isaac,
Lord,
you who said to me,
‘Go back to your country and your relatives, and I will make you prosper,’
I am unworthy of all the kindness and faithfulness you have shown your servant.
I had only my staff when I crossed this Jordan,
but now I have become two camps.
Save me,
I pray,
from the hand of my brother Esau,
for I am afraid he is coming. 
But you have said,
‘I will surely make you prosper,
and will make your descendants like the sand of the sea, which cannot be counted.’”
He spent the night there,
and from what he had with him he selected a gift for his brother Esau.
two hundred female goats and twenty male goats,
two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
thirty female camels with their young,
forty cows and ten bulls,
and twenty female donkeys and ten male donkeys.
He put them in the care of his servants each herd by itself,
and said to his servants,
“Go ahead of me, and keep some space between the herds.”
He instructed the one in the lead.
“When my brother Esau meets you and asks,
‘Who do you belong to,
and where are you going,
and who owns all these animals in front of you?’
then you are to say,
‘They belong to your servant Jacob.
They are a gift sent to my lord Esau,
and he is coming behind us.’”
He also instructed the second,
the third and all the others who followed the herds,
“When you meet Esau, say this way to him,
‘Your servant Jacob is coming behind us.’”
For he thought,
“I will pacify him with these gifts I am sending on ahead.
later,
when I see him perhaps he will receive me.”
So Jacob’s gifts went on ahead of him,
but he himself spent the night in the camp.
That night Jacob got up and took his two wives,
his two female servants and his eleven sons and crossed the ford of the Jabbok.
So Jacob was left alone,
and a man wrestled with him till daybreak.
When the man saw that he could not overpower him,
he touched the socket of Jacob’s hip,
so that his hip was wrenched as he wrestled with the man.
Then the man said,
“Let me go, for it is daybreak.”
But Jacob replied,
“I will not let you go unless you bless me.”
The man asked him,
“What is your name?”
And hee answered
“Jacob,”
Then the man said,
“Your name will no longer be Jacob,
but Israel,
because you have struggled with God and with humans and have overcome.”
Jacob said,
“Please tell me your name.”
But he replied,
“Why do you ask my name?”
Then he blessed him there.
So Jacob called the place Peniel,
It is because I saw God face to face, and yet my life was spared.
The sun rose above him as he passed Peniel,
and he was limping because of his hip.
Therefore to this day the Israelites do not eat the tendon attached to the socket of the hip,
because the socket of Jacob’s hip was touched near the tendon.
Jacob looked up and there was Esau,
coming with his four hundred men.
He divided the children among Leah, Rachel and the two female servants.
He put the female servants and their children in front,
Leah and her children next,
and Rachel and Joseph in the rear.
He himself went on ahead and bowed down to the ground seven times as he approached his brother.
But Esau ran to meet Jacob,
and embraced him,
he threw his arms around his neck and kissed him.
And they wept.
Then Esau looked up and saw the women and children.
He asked,
“Who are these with you?”
Jacob answered,
“They are the children God has graciously given your servant.”
Then the female servants and their children approached and bowed down.
Next, Leah and her children came and bowed down.
Last of all came Joseph and Rachel, and they too bowed down.
Esau asked,
“What’s the meaning of all these flocks and herds I met?”
He said,
“To find favor in the eyes of my lord.”
But Esau said,
“I already have plenty, my brother.
Keep what you have for yourself.”
Said Jacob,
“No,
please,
If I have found favor in your eyes, accept this gift from me.
For to see your face is like seeing the face of God,
now that you have received me favorably.
Please accept the present that was brought to you,
for God has been gracious to me and I have all I need.”
And because Jacob insisted, Esau accepted it.
Then Esau said,
“Let us be on our way, I’ll accompany you.”
But Jacob said to him,
“My lord knows that the children are tender and that I must care for the ewes and cows that are nursing their young.
If they are driven hard just one day, all the animals will die.
So let my lord go on ahead of his servant,
while I move along slowly at the pace of the flocks the children,
until I come to my lord in Seir.”
Esau said,
“Then let me leave some of my men with you.”
Jacob asked,
“But why do that?
Just let me find favor in the eyes of my lord.”
So that day Esau started on his way back to Seir.
Jacob, however, went to Sukkoth,
where he built a place for himself,
and made shelters for his livestock.
That is why the place is called Sukkoth.
After Jacob came from Paddan Aram,
he arrived safely at the city of Shechem,
in Canaan,
and camped within sight of the city.